# RISK FACTOR ANALYSIS FOR HEART DISEASE

## Team members: Adora, Arun, Cailin, Prachi 


According to the World Health Organization, heart disease is the leading cause of death in the world. This dataset of 400k people was analysed to determine the risk factors of heart disease and its impact. People of all ages ranging from 18 to 80 years or above participated and were asked questions.

Our group asked the question: what risk factors contribute to heart disease? We analyzed the following 7 risk factors to determine if they have a correlation to heart disease: age, alcohol use, BMI, smoking, sex, sleep time, and physical activity. 

- It was observed from this dataset that about 8.6% people have heart disease such as Coronary heart disease (CHD) or myocardial infarction (MI) and the majority of them were aged 50 or above. Heart disease and age has positive correlation. As the age increases, the risk of heart disease increases.

- Next risk factor in the study was alcohol drinking. Men were asked if they consume more than 14 drinks per week and females were asked if they consume more than 7 drinks per week. According to CDC (2022), moderate alcohol consumption is 2 drinks or less for males and 1 drink or less for females. 21,777 people answered yes for this question which makes it about 6.8% people. Out of which 1141 had heart disease. So according to this data, moderate alcohol consumption does not affect very greatly on risk of getting heart disease unless there are exception such as high BP or pregnant women.

- In an analysis of heart disease in relation to BMI, there is a demonstrated correlation between the two. it is clearly seen that the further away one gets from a healthy BMI (defined as 18.5-24.9 by the CDC), the more likely one is to have heart disease. Those who are underweight (less than 18.5 BMI) have an increased risk of heart disease, but less so than those whose BMI is greater than the healthy range. The number of people with heart disease steadily increases as BMI increases, and conversely, the number of people without heart disease increases as the number approaches the healthy BMI range.

- In the analysis of the sexes, the occurrence of heart disease between Males and Females was studied. Is there a difference in the risk of heart disease between males and females and which sex in more likely to get a heart disease?. This study included a sample of over 167k females and 151k males. We found that approximately 6.7% of the female participants and 10.6 % of the male participants have been diagnosed with a heart disease. This was visualized using a bar chart. Interestingly, even though there were more female participants in the study, a higher percentage of males were diagnosed with a heart disease. Based on this data, we can conclude that males appear to have a higher risk of developing heart disease compared to females.

- Smoking was also analyzed as a risk factor. Does smoking increase the likelihood of developing a heart disease? To investigate this, the participants were asked if they have smoked at least 100 cigarettes in their lifetime- The results showed that 41.2% responded 'yes,' while 58.5% responded 'no'. Two pie charts were created to visualize the difference in heart disease occurrence between participants that smoke, and those that do not. The results showed that among smokers,  12.2%  have been diagnosed with heart disease and 6% of non- smokers have been diagnosed with heart disease.From these findings, we can draw a clear conclusion that smoking increases one's likelihood of developing heart disease.

- For the analysis of sleep time, the hours of sleep for every adult in the dataset ranged from just one hour to sleeping for a full day (24 hours). By creating five distinct sleep categories for the dataset, this could show us if there was a significant impact of the sleep time for each individuals. From the analysis, almost two thirds of the adults were getting the recommended amount of sleep time (7-9 hours of sleep), and only 3.5% were getting very limited sleep (less than 4 hours) and an even smaller percentage (0.3%) of individuals were getting an unhealthy amount of sleep of more than 12 hours.

- The next factor is physical activity. The CDC recommends that the average adult should get a least some form of physical activity. Any form of physical activity is better than absolutely no physical activity. From the dataset, after analyzing the data, we found that only 9884 adults have heart disease and do not get any form of physical activity. This translates to a 3.1% of the total dataset. Physical activity has a limited factor on heart disease.
